                     16 Balancing Flexibility and Rigidity
                              Do Unions Make Sense in the On-Demand Economy?
                              Seth C. Oranburg and Liya Palagashvili




                     A Unionization: Background
                     Unionization – the organization o
---
 workers to act collectively to obtain higher wages or
                     better working conditions – has a storied history. While precursors to trade unions such as
                     guilds existed be
---
ore the Revolutionary War, the modern union did not come into its
                     own until a
---
ter the Industrial Revolution. As we move into a new economic era, the
                     necessity and use o
---
 unions is once again called into question.


                     1 History o
---
 Unionization
                     Precursors to trade unions ﬁrst emerged in the 1800s as journeymen associations
                     attempted to set wage schedules 
---
or their trades, although early courts 
---
ound criminal
                     liability 
---
or these “conspiracies.”1 Unionization increased a
---
ter the Civil War in part as a
                     means to keep nonwhites and women out o
---
 skilled trades.2 But unions did not truly
                     come into the main o
---
 American li
---
e until the Great Depression, when labor unrest
                     compelled the 
---
ederal government to pass the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA).3
                        The NLRA authorized workers’ rights “to sel
---
-organization, to 
---
orm, join, or assist labor
                     organizations, [and] to bargain collectively” and created the National Labor Relations
                     Board (NLRB) to en
---
orce the regime.4 The NLRA, which announced that the o
---
ﬁcial
                     policy o
---
 the United States was “to encourage the practice and procedure o
---
 collective
                     bargaining,” was regarded as “perhaps the most radical piece o
---
 legislation ever enacted
                     by the United States Congress.”5 Workers staged waves o
---
 
---
actory occupations and
                     1
                       Commonwealth v. Pullis, 3 Doc. Hist. 59 (Pa. 1806), also known as the Philadelphia Cordwainers case.
                     2
                       James Gray Pope, A Brie
---
 History o
---
 United States Labor and Employment Law, The Ox
---
ord Inter-
                       national Encyclopedia o
---
 Legal History 477–486 (Stanley N. Katz ed.) (2009) (hereina
---
ter, “History o
---

                       Labor Law”), at 480.
                     3
                       National Labor Relations Act o
---
 1935 §§ 151–169 (2012). See also Mark Barenberg, The Political
                       Economy o
---
 the Wagner Act: Power, Symbol, and Workplace Cooperation, 106 Harv. L. Rev. 1379, 1389
                       (1993) (“[T] he opportunity 
---
or such a dramatic legislative initiative was generated by ‘mass politics’ in the
                       
---
orm o
---
 popular electoral realignment, populist political organization, and mass labor unrest . . . . That
                       opportunity was seized by loosely interconnected networks o
---
 political-technocratic entrepreneurs driven by
                       progressive ideological commitment and ambition.”).
                     4
                       Kate Andrias, The New Labor Law, 126 Yale L. J. 2, 14 (2016).
                     5
                       Karl E. Klare, Judicial Deradicalization o
---
 the Wagner Act and the Origins o
---
 Modern Legal Consciousness,
                       1937-1941, 62 Minn. L. Rev. 265, 265 (1978).


                                                                                                                                179

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  180                                                                         The “Fissured” Workplace

                  sit-down strikes while President Roosevelt threatened to pack the Supreme Court with
                  new justices i
---
 they did not uphold the NLRA’s constitutionality.6 These unorthodox
                  tactics succeeded, and union membership in the manu
---
acturing sector quadrupled in the
                  ﬁrst decade o
---
 the NLRA.7
                      But World War II changed the economy 
---
orever. Be
---
ore WWII, America’s role in the
                  global economy was as primarily a supplier o
---
 raw materials and manu
---
actured goods.8
                  A
---
ter the war, Europe was in shambles, and America (to whom the European nations
                  owed a great deal o
---
 money) supplanted Great Britain as the ﬁnancial center o
---
 the west
                  as the dollar replaced the pound as the world’s reserve currency. Meanwhile, the 
---
ederal
                  government curtailed union rights9 and 27 states passed “right-to-work” laws that prohibit
                  mandatory union membership and dues.
                      The American labor 
---
orce changed dramatically this century, and unionization has
                  
---
allen sharply in correlation with the shi
---
t 
---
rom a goods to a services economy. In 1935,
                  when the NLRA was passed, more American workers were employed in production than
                  in services.10 In 2013, over 83 percent o
---
 American workers were employed in the service
                  sector.11 Union membership as a percent o
---
 nonagricultural employment declined 
---
rom
                  a peak o
---
 over 35 percent in 1954 to under 12 percent in 2003.12 Union membership in
                  the private sector was only 6.7 percent in 2015.13


                  2 Unionization in the On-Demand Economy
                  Today, there is a debate regarding whether 
---
urther unionization is needed in various
                  sectors o
---
 the economy. Companies in the “on-demand economy”14 (i.e., Uber, Ly
---
t,
                  Task Rabbit, Handy) have come under scrutiny 
---
or their employment practices.
                    Many workers supplying on-demand goods and services are classiﬁed as independent
                  contractors as opposed to traditional employees. Traditional employees receive an IRS

                   6
                     History o
---
 Labor Law, supra note 2, at 482.
                   7
                     Id.
                   8
                     Guiseppe Berlingieri, Outsourcing and the Shi
---
t 
---
rom Manu
---
acturing to Services, Winter 2013/14 Centre-
                     Piece 16, 16 (2014), http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/cp413.pd
---
.
                   9
                     For example, Congress passed the Labor Management Relations (Ta
---
t–Hartley Act) in 1947, which
                     restricted some union activity and permitted states to enact “right-to-work” laws. In 1964, Congress passed
                     Civil Rights Act, which prohibited unions 
---
rom discriminating on the basis o
---
 race, religion, sex, or
                     national origin. Labor Management Relations Act o
---
 1947 29 U.S.C. § 141 (2012).
                  10
                     U.S. Bureau o
---
 the Census, Series D 127-1411, Historical Statistics o
---
 the United States, Colo-
                     nial Times to 1970, Part 1 at 4 (2016) (Year: 1935; Total Non-Farm Workers: 27:035; Mining: 897;
                     Construction: 912; Manu
---
acturing: 9069; Transportation: 2786; Trade: 5431; Finance: 1335; Other
                     Services: 3142; Government: 3481. Total Goods: 10,878; Total Services: 9908 (in thousands)).
                  11
                     Berlingieri, supra note 8.
                  12
                     Congressional Research Service, RL 32553, Union Members Trends in The United States (ﬁgure 1)
                     at 11 (2004).
                  13
                     Megan Dunn & James Walker, U.S. Bureau o
---
 Labor Statistics, Union Membership in The United States at
                     4 (2006), www.bls.gov/spotlight/2016/union-membership-in-the-united-states/pd
---
/union-membership-in-
                     the-united-states.pd
---
.
                  14
                     Mike Jaconi, The “On-Demand Economy” is Revolutionizing Consumer Behavior – Here’s How, Business
                     Insider Mag., www.businessinsider.com/the-on-demand-economy-2014-7 (accessed May 31, 2018), (The
                     deﬁnition used by the coalition o
---
 on-demand companies is as 
---
ollows: “The On-Demand Economy is
                     deﬁned as the economic activity created by digital marketplaces that 
---
ulﬁll consumer demand via
                     immediate access to and convenient provisioning o
---
 goods and services.”). “Gig” and “sharing” economy
                     have also been used to describe this plat
---
orm.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                     Balancing Flexibility and Rigidity                                                                         181

                     tax Form W-2, while contractors receive a Form 1099.15 But the distinction between W-2
                     Employees and 1099 Contractors is much more than 
---
ormal. Employees and contractors
                     are treated di
---

---
erently under both tax and labor regulations. For example, employees
                     enjoy protections under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), the Employment Retire-
                     ment Income Security Act (ERISA), and the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA), while
                     contractors generally are not protected by these laws. Furthermore, and more importantly
                     
---
or the purposes o
---
 this paper, contractors do not have the same right as employees to
                     unionize and bargain collectively.
                        Despite the ostensible tax and employment classiﬁcation o
---
 on-demand workers as
                     1099 contractors, unions are now pushing 
---
or the right to represent these workers.
                     Supporters o
---
 unionization claim this will allow on-demand workers to bargain 
---
or better
                     wages and beneﬁts, and this is necessary because contractors do not enjoy the beneﬁt o
---

                     employment laws. As one recent example, Seattle passed an ordinance granting labor
                     unions the right to represent drivers 
---
or Uber (though Uber does not classi
---
y its drivers as
                     employees). The U.S. Chamber o
---
 Commerce has sued to challenge the validity o
---
 this
                     ordinance on several grounds (e.g., preemption by NLRA, antitrust violations), and the
                     case is currently playing out.16 In New York City, a group o
---
 drivers steered by the
                     International Association o
---
 Machinists and Aerospace Workers created the “Independ-
                     ent Drivers Guild” in 2016. Uber has recognized and even 
---
unded the guild, but as part
                     o
---
 the deal, Uber required that Machinists do not attempt to unionize drivers 
---
or ﬁve
                     years.17 The Guild’s mission states: “The courts have thus 
---
ar restricted app-based drivers
                     
---
rom organizing as a traditional union, but we believe that the power o
---
 a union is
                     workers banding together. With the Guild, we unite to win better working conditions and
                     increase worker’s earnings, now.”18


                     B Unionization Economics
                     From an economic perspective, industry unionizations could have both large costs and
                     substantial beneﬁts, depending on the various conditions o
---
 the industry. Economists
                     di
---

---
erentiate labor markets into cases that are monopsonistic (or oligopsonistic) versus
                     cases that are competitive, and they draw di
---

---
erent theoretical analyses 
---
or union harm or
                     beneﬁt depending on these labor market conditions. Unions provide beneﬁts to workers
                     when employers have much more power than employees. By unionizing, otherwise
                     powerless employees can collectively protect themselves 
---
rom an otherwise dominant
                     employer. Indeed, union rules were developed in the 1930s to protect 
---
actory workers
                     
---
rom monopolistic manu
---
acturing employers who would unilaterally impose unduly




                     15
                        See U.S. Internal Revenue Service, Forms and Associated Taxes 
---
or Independent Contractors (2017),
                        www.irs.gov/businesses/small-businesses-sel
---
-employed/
---
orms-and-associated-taxes-
---
or-independent-contractors;
                        Internal Revenue Service, Depositing And Reporting Employment Taxes (2017), www.irs.gov/businesses/small-
                        businesses-sel
---
-employed/depositing-and-reporting-employment-taxes.
                     16
                        Chamber o
---
 Commerce v. Seattle, 890 F.3d 769 (9th Cir. 2018) (partially reversing grant o
---
 De
---
endants’
                        motion to dismiss and remanding 
---
or 
---
urther proceedings only on antitrust claim).
                     17
                        Miranda Kantz, How Drivers Are Finally Out
---
oxing Uber, Wired (accessed May 25, 2017),
                        www.wired.com/2017/05/how-drivers-are-ﬁnally-out
---
oxing-uber/.
                     18
                        About the IDG, Independent Drivers Guild, www.drivingguild.org (Jun. 1, 2018).




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  182                                                                      The “Fissured” Workplace

                  burdensome working conditions without commensurate pay or beneﬁts. The original
                  goals o
---
 union rules was to provide minimum and maximum amounts o
---
 hours to be
                  worked so workers could not be exploited by power
---
ul employers. Rigidity in hours and
                  days worked, promotions, beneﬁts, and other conditions o
---
 employment are the sine qua
                  non o
---
 collective bargaining agreements (CBAs).
                     CBAs give workers certainty about these terms. Immutability is their nature and
                  purpose. The economic literature is replete with examples o
---
 how CBAs create rigid
                  rules 
---
or work, so this chapter will only brieﬂy exempli
---
y a 
---
ew o
---
 the rules that are
                  pertinent to work in the sharing economy.
                     While there are many di
---

---
erent types o
---
 CBAs, we can best understand CBAs in
                  general by looking at meta-analysis o
---
 such contracts. The most comprehensive meta-
                  analysis o
---
 CBAs is 
---
ound in the Bloomberg Law series entitled Basic Patterns in Union
                  Contracts. Most recently in its 
---
ourteenth edition (1995), this analysis o
---
 over 400 CBAs
                  
---
rom a variety o
---
 industries, type and size o
---
 unions, number o
---
 employees covered, and
                  geographical areas shows that there are 
---
our provisions that are extremely common in
                  traditional CBAs but particularly inapposite to the on-demand and gig economy.19 To
                  begin, 97 percent o
---
 CBAs limit discharge to “cause” or “just cause.” All other discharge
                  may be wrong
---
ul and is subject to a proceeding that generally have three or 
---
our steps.
                  Almost all union CBAs require employers to provide li
---
e insurance, some 
---
orm o
---

                  medical coverage, and, anachronistically, pension plans. Retirement eligibility is almost
                  always stipulated at age 65. More than hal
---
 require “income maintenance” (required
                  annual pay raises 
---
or everyone), and almost all provide 
---
or overtime pay (generally time-
                  and-a-hal
---
 ) when work exceeds 8 hours per day or 40 hours per week, or when work
                  occurs on a holiday or weekend. Seniority is generally the dispositive 
---
actor in hiring,
                  ﬁring, promotion, and layo
---

---
s. More than hal
---
 o
---
 union employees governed by CBAs get
                  ﬁve weeks o
---
 vacation per year, and over 80 percent enjoy 
---
our weeks per year o
---
 paid
                  leave. These rigid rules may beneﬁt workers in certain “monopsony” markets, but they
                  also cause unemployment and higher consumer prices in other “competitive” markets.


                  1 Unionization in Monopsony
                  Traditionally, the argument 
---
or unionization has been strongest in the presence o
---
 lopsided
                  bargaining power (i.e. very power
---
ul employers and powerless employees). In economic
                  theory, such “asymmetries” occur when labor markets have single buyers o
---
 labor – called
                  “monopsonies” (in contrast with monopolies, which are single sellers). The classic example
                  o
---
 such a monopsonistic labor market is when there is a large company in a small rural
                  town that can exploit workers because workers do not have many other opportunities 
---
or
                  employment. Related issues arise where a hand
---
ul o
---
 employers that dominate a market are
                  somehow able to collude to depress wages through their “oligopsony.”
                     Generally, monopsony exists only 
---
or jobs in a narrow geographic region or that
                  require a highly specialized skill set, since close alternative occupations are limited.
                  The labor market 
---
or nurses, 
---
or example, has been cited in the literature as a classic case
                  o
---
 monopsonistic power because nurses typically have one buyer: hospitals. As described
                  by Link and Landon, labor markets 
---
or nurses approaches “classical oligopsony or

                  19
                       Although the terms gig economy and on-demand plat
---
orms do not always overlap, in this chapter we use
                       on-demand and gig economy interchangeably when there is overlap.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                     Balancing Flexibility and Rigidity                                                                      183

                     monopsony. This was evidenced by the 
---
act that over 70 percent o
---
 the hospitals in the
                     United States are located in a one-hospital community while many other communities
                     are serviced by only a 
---
ew hospitals.”20 Other special industry examples approaching
                     monopsonistic power are university pro
---
essors (because o
---
 the specialized skill set), coal
                     miners in the twentieth century, and baseball players subject to reverse clauses.21 Reverse
                     clauses bounded the player to the team, until the contract expired or unless the owner
                     wanted to “
---
ree” the player. In other words, players were not “
---
ree agents” with the power
                     to change teams. Other sources o
---
 monopsonistic power can arise i
---
 workers are ignorant
                     o
---
 alternatives or incur high costs by changing jobs, or i
---
 employees have developed other
                     ties to the employer or the geographic location.
                        Monopsony can depress worker’s wages, beneﬁts, and working conditions. By deﬁnition,
                     monopsony means that employees are bound to a certain employer by skill, geography, or
                     other reasons. Workers’ dependence on a single employer gives that employer power to
                     lower wages, limit beneﬁts, and otherwise exploit that power asymmetry.
                        Labor unions are thought to ameliorate some o
---
 monopsony’s harm to workers. Unions
                     are organizations, backed by governments, that negotiate with businesses or other
                     organizations on behal
---
 o
---
 their union members (the workers). I
---
 companies are unwill-
                     ingly to meet various standards that workers want, union members use strikes, sit-ins, and
                     other tools to 
---
orce the employer to meet such standards. Theoretically, these collective
                     actions can lead to better terms 
---
or workers where unions induce pressure 
---
or wages
                     increases, better beneﬁts, and improved working conditions. Rees explains that unions
                     are able to do this because “their ability to impose costs on management through strikes,
                     slowdowns, or other pressure tactics, in the short run, are greater than the costs o
---
 the
                     wage increase provided through collective bargaining.22 In relatively monopsonistic labor
                     markets, empirically, it has 
---
ound that unionization provided greater wage and 
---
ringe
                     beneﬁts with registered nurses, practical nurses, and hospital secretaries and house-
                     keepers.23 From one study, the wage e
---

---
ect o
---
 unions on nurses is plus 8 percent, and
                     plus 11–12 percent 
---
or hospital secretaries and housekeepers.24


                     2 Unionization in Competitive Markets
                     On the other hand, when labor markets are relatively competitive, the case 
---
or unions is
                     “mixed” in terms o
---
 demonstrated beneﬁts 
---
rom unions, and demonstrated harms.25
                     20
                        Charles Link & John Landon, Monopsony and Union Power in the Market 
---
or Nurses, 41 S. Econ. J. 649,
                        649 (1975).
                     21
                        For university pro
---
essors, see, Michael R. Ransom, Seniority and Monopsony in the Academic Labor
                        Market, 83 Am. Econ. Rev. 221 (1993); 
---
or coal miners in the twentieth century, see William M. Boal,
                        Testing 
---
or Employer Monopsony in Turn-o
---
-the-Century Coal Mining, 26 RAND J. Econ. 519 (1995); 
---
or
                        baseball players subject to the reverse clause, see Lawrence M. Kahn, The Sports Business as a Labor
                        Market Laboratory, 14 J. Econ. Perspectives 75 (2000) and Gerald W. Scully, Pay and Per
---
ormance in
                        Major League Baseball, 64 Am. Econ. Rev. 915 (1974).
                     22
                        Albert Rees, The E
---

---
ects o
---
 Unions on Resource Allocation, 6 J. Lab. & Econ, 69, 69 (1963).
                     23
                        Roger Feldman & Richard Sche
---
ﬂer, The Union Impact on Hospital Wages and Fringe Beneﬁts, 35 Indus.
                        & Lab. Rel. Rev. 196 (1982); Charles Link & John Landon, Monopsony and Union Power in the Market
                        
---
or Nurses, 41 S. Econ. J. 649 (1975).
                     24
                        Feldman & Sche
---
ﬂer, supra note 22.
                     25
                        For a theoretical and empirical analysis on di
---

---
erences o
---
 demonstrated beneﬁts between monopsony and
                        competitive labor markets, see Kip Viscusi, Union, Labor Market Structure, and the Wel
---
are Implications o
---

                        Quality Work, 1 J. Lab. Res. 175–192 (1990).




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  184                                                                        The “Fissured” Workplace

                     With competitive labor market processes, economic theory suggests that employees are
                  generally neither substantially underpaid nor substantially overpaid. I
---
, in a particular
                  circumstance, workers are underpaid, not only do they have an unusually strong incen-
                  tive to search 
---
or and accept better jobs elsewhere, but so, too, do proﬁt-motivated
                  competing employers have strong incentives to seek out and recruit underpaid workers,
                  whether by locating near these workers, o
---

---
ering them better pay, or taking other cost-
                  e
---

---
ective measures to entice these workers. These processes o
---
 adjustment by both workers
                  and employers generally push employment arrangements and worker pay up to competi-
                  tive levels. This is not to say that in all competitive markets, at any given moment, wages
                  are precisely e
---
ﬁcient. Rather, in labor markets that are characterized by competition,
                  there is a tendency toward this outcome. Contrast this with the monopsony. In mono-
                  psonistic labor markets, employers do not 
---
ace strong incentives to increase worker pay,
                  and they might decrease it.
                     This is again to say that unions can beneﬁt workers in conventional monopsonistic
                  labor markets. But according to economic theory, when unions enter into an otherwise
                  normal labor market, they can pressure ﬁrms to provide wages, beneﬁts, and working
                  conditions that are above the competitive levels. Although above-market wages might
                  sound good 
---
or workers, such market distortions, in theory, can harm nonunion workers,
                  employers, and even consumers by creating dead weight loss to society.
                     Unionization can lead to above-market wages because unions “gain market power by
                  obtaining a legal monopoly on the provision o
---
 labor services to a particular ﬁrm or
                  industry.”26 The degree o
---
 impact by unions on prices is directly correlated with unions’
                  power. Unions become more power
---
ul i
---
 the ﬁrm does not have many alternatives to the
                  labor supply or i
---
 other labor supplies are restricted. The main legal instrument that
                  unions use to restrict employment conditions is the CBA. CBAs typically limit working
                  conditions like hours and days worked, require an annual cost-o
---
-living pay increase, limit
                  ﬁring to “cause,” and have proceedings 
---
or employees who believe they were wrongly
                  terminated. CBAs generally strengthen employee power. In a monopsonistic market,
                  union-negotiated CBAs can restore power symmetry, but in competitive markets, CBAs
                  can require wages above even the competitive levels.27
                     According to economic theory, one negative impact o
---
 a union in otherwise normal
                  labor markets is creating unemployment. This is because unions can hold wages above
                  the competitive level, thereby creating a wage ﬂoor. Now 
---
acing increased union wages,
                  employers reduce their quantity demanded o
---
 unionized labor. On the supply side, the
                  wage ﬂoors lead to an excess o
---
 the supply o
---
 workers. The net e
---

---
ect is the creation o
---

                  unemployment.
                     Some economists also argue that higher unionized wages create lower wages 
---
or
                  nonunionized workers because the supply o
---
 nonunionized workers increases, thereby
                  depressing the wages in nonunionized sectors.28

                  26
                     Paul A. Samuelson & William D. Nordhaus, Economics 320 (Snehi Kumari ed., 19th ed. 2010).
                  27
                     Where unions are not power
---
ul (i.e. unions cannot restrict the use o
---
 nonunion labor), then it is possible
                     (absent other countervailing 
---
actors) that competitive 
---
orces would drive those ﬁrms with above-
                     competitive wages out o
---
 the market. However, the use o
---
 legislation to preclude nonunion entry (i.e.
                     signi
---
ying power
---
ul unions) is one 
---
actor that would prevent some o
---
 these otherwise competitive 
---
orces
                  28
                     H. Gregg Lewis, The Labor Monopoly Problem: A Positive Paradigm, J. Pol. Econ. (1951); W. Mellow,
                     Unionism and Wages: A Longitudinal Analysis, Rev. Economics & Statistics (1981); For more recent
                     empirical work, see Bernd Fitzenberger, Karstan Kohn, & Alexander Lembcke, Union Densities and




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                     Balancing Flexibility and Rigidity                                                                     185

                        CBAs almost always contain more than just wages. They include provisions on hiring
                     and ﬁring, seniority, beneﬁts, and other stipulations. Provisions that create 
---
rictions in the
                     mobility and churn over o
---
 labor (
---
or example, by making it more di
---
ﬁcult and costly to
                     ﬁre an employee), can beneﬁt the employees, but these restrictions can also decrease
                     productivity, and impose higher labor costs.29 Some provisions in the CBAs can thus
                     increase costs to employers which may be passed on to downstream consumers or limit
                     purchases 
---
rom upstream suppliers.
                        Empirically, scholars 
---
ound that unions do increase unionized workers’ wages, bene-
                     ﬁts, and working conditions.30 But on the cost side, they 
---
ound that greater unionization
                     increases unemployment in the country, and speciﬁcally among 
---
emales, young males,
                     and older individuals.31 Some studies 
---
ound that although unions beneﬁt unionized
                     workers, this can come at the expense o
---
 harming nonunion members via the surplus o
---

                     labor e
---

---
ect.32 Other studies 
---
ound that unions can help nonunion members through
                     other mechanisms such as the threat o
---
 a union: when one company believes that its
                     workers may unionize because another company unionized, it increases worker condi-
                     tions and wages to appease the threat o
---
 unionization by workers.33
                        While some studies 
---
ound that unions diminish productivity, economic e
---
ﬁciency, and
                     labor market dynamism,34 countervailing studies 
---
ound that unions increase e
---
ﬁciency by
                     reducing quit rates and labor turnover, which in turn lowers the cost o
---
 training new


                        Varieties o
---
 Coverage: The Anatomy o
---
 Union Wage E
---

---
ects in Germany, 66 Indus. & Lab. Rel. Rev.
                        (2013) ﬁnd both that union wages rise with union density in covered places, but also that higher union
                        density is associated with lower wages in nonunionized ﬁrms. Fitzenberger, Kohn, and Lembcke discuss
                        that this ﬁnding could either be because o
---
 the downward pressure on wages 
---
rom an increase in labor
                        supply in nonunionized sectors, or because o
---
 a decline in investment when union density increases.
                     29
                        On diminishing productivity, economic e
---
ﬁciency, and labor market dynamism, see Robert DeFina,
                        Unions, Relative Wages, and Economic E
---
ﬁciency, J. Lab. Econ. (1983); on suboptimal deployment o
---

                        labor through restrictive practices, see David Metcal
---
 Trade Unions and Economic Per
---
ormance: The British
                        Evidence, LSE Quarterly 3 (1989); on limiting innovative and investment activities, see Connolly, Hirsh,
                        & Hirshey, Union Rent-Seeking, Intangible Capital, and Market Value o
---
 the Firm, Rev. Economics &
                        Statistics (1986); Grout, Investment and Wages in the Absence o
---
 Binding Contracts: A Nash Bargaining
                        Approach, Econometrica (1984); Hirsch and Link, Labor Union E
---

---
ects on Innovative Activity, 8 J. Lab.
                        Econ 8 (1987); on unions having negative impact on proﬁtability, see Barry Hirsch, Union Coverage and
                        Proﬁtability Among U.S. Firms, 73 Rev. Economics & Statistics (1991); Bronars, Deere, & Tracy, The
                        E
---

---
ects o
---
 Unions on Firm Behavior: An Empirical Analysis Using Firm-Level Data, 33 Ind. Rel. (1994);
                        Pasquale Laporta and Alexander Jenkins, Unionization and Proﬁtability in the Canadian Manu
---
acturing
                        Sector, 51 Ind. Rel. (1996); J. Machin and M. Stewart, Trade Unions and Financial Per
---
ormance, 48 Ox
---
.
                        Econ. Papers (1996); Richard S. Ruback & Martin B. Zimmerman, Unionization and Proﬁtability:
                        Evidence 
---
rom Capital Markets, 92 J. Pol. Econ. 1134, 1134 (1984).
                     30
                        Richard B. Freeman, The E
---

---
ect o
---
 Unionism on Fringe Beneﬁts, 34 Indus. & Lab. Rel. Rev. 489, 509
                        (1981); Richard B. Freeman, Individual Mobility and Union Voice in the Labor Market, 66 Am. Econ.
                        Rev. 361 (1976).
                     31
                        Giuseppe Bertola, Francine Blau, & Lawrence Kahn, Labor Market Institutions and Demographic
                        Employment Patterns, J. Population Econ. (2007); Edward Montgomery, Employment and Unemploy-
                        ment E
---

---
ects o
---
 Unions, J. Lab. Econ. (1989).
                     32
                        Lewis, supra note 27; Mellow, supra note 27; Fitzenberger, Karstan Kohn, & Alexander Lembcke, supra
                        note 27.
                     33
                        Bruce Western & Jake Rosen
---
eld, Unions, Norms, and the Rise o
---
 U.S. Wage Inequality, 76 Am. Soc. Rev
                        (2011); Jake Rosen
---
eld, What Unions No Longer Do (2014).
                     34
                        Robert DeFina, Unions, Relative Wages, and Economic E
---
ﬁciency, J. Lab. Econ. (1983); David Metcal
---

                        (1989), supra note 28; Connolly, Hirsh, and Hirshey (1986), supra note 28; Grout (1984), supra note 28;
                        Hirsh & Link (1987), supra note 28.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  186                                                                          The “Fissured” Workplace

                  workers and increases productivity.35 In sum, the empirical debate on unions and
                  productivity is vast, spanning over 60 years and including hundreds o
---
 studies with
                  conﬂicting ﬁndings.
                     In attempting to reconcile some o
---
 the mixed ﬁndings on unions and productivity, The
                  Economics o
---
 Trade Unions (2017) provides a comprehensive meta-analysis and sophisti-
                  cated meta-regressions on the vast literature pertaining to the question o
---
 unions and
                  productivity.36 It reveals that 
---
actors such as industry, country, and institutional context
                  matter 
---
or how unionization impacts productivity. The authors ﬁnd that unionization has
                  been beneﬁcial in the United States 
---
or the construction and education industries,37 that
                  unionization has harmed productivity in the UK regardless o
---
 industry, and that unions
                  harm productivity in more regulated labor markets than in less regulated labor markets
                  (particularly in the manu
---
acturing sector).38 In other words, on this last 
---
actor, less
                  regulated labor markets can moderate the negative aspects o
---
 unions.
                     In analyzing the channels through which unionization impacts productivity, the
                  authors conclude that productivity is harmed through channels o
---
 technology and
                  investment.39 Speciﬁcally, they ﬁnd a moderate negative e
---

---
ect o
---
 unions on physical
                  capital investment and a large negative impact o
---
 unions on intangible capital (technol-
                  ogy and adoption o
---
 it, stock o
---
 knowledge, and the know-how), concluding that “unions
                  have an adverse association with productivity and productivity growth through the
                  channel o
---
 investment behavior o
---
 ﬁrms.”40
                     In terms o
---
 the labor channel, they conclude that less employee turnover is a
                  mechanism by which unions have been 
---
ound to improve ﬁrm per
---
ormance, though
                  this result is less robust than others given the small number o
---
 studies that have
                  success
---
ully disaggregated this employee channel.41 As applied to the gig economy,
                  however, reducing employee turnover may have a smaller impact on per
---
ormance o
---

                  ﬁrms. By its very nature, the gig economy is designed to have low costs o
---
 onboarding and
                  o
---

---
boarding employees. There
---
ore, the improvement that labor unions tend to bring to
                  ﬁrm per
---
ormance through lower employee turnover may have less impact in the gig
                  economy.
                     Overall, the authors ﬁnd strong evidence that unions negatively impact most ﬁrms’
                  ﬁnancial per
---
ormance. This can adversely a
---

---
ect long-term investments and growth, to
                  the extent that the lower ﬁnancial per
---
ormance comes 
---
rom the channel o
---
 quasi-rents
                  
---
rom long-lived assets, as Doucouliagos and Laroche (2009) have 
---
ound.42 However,

                  35
                     Freeman (1976) supra note 29; Freeman & Medo
---

---
, What Do Unions Do? (1984); S.B. Vroman, The
                     Union–Nonunion Wage Di
---

---
erential and Monitoring Costs, 32 Econ. Letters (1990); C. Bauer and
                     J. Lingens, Does Collective Bargaining Restore E
---
ﬁciency in a Search Model with Large Firms?, 113 Econ.
                     J. 113 (2013); E. Barth, K. Moene, and F. Willumsen, The Scandinavian Model – An Interpretation, 117 J.
                     Pub. Econ. (2014).
                  36
                     Hristos Doucouliagos, Richard Freeman, & Patrice Laroche, The Economics o
---
 Trade Unions:
                     A Study o
---
 a Research Field and Its Findings (2017).
                  37
                     Though the authors indicate that studies that include technology in the regressions ﬁnd less positive e
---

---
ect
                     o
---
 unions and that when studies use physical output or e
---
ﬁciency as the “outcome variable” they ﬁnd larger
                     negative e
---

---
ects.
                  38
                     Doucouliagos et al., supra note 35, at 40–71.
                  39
                     Id. at 86–109.
                  40
                     Id. at 109
                  41
                     Id. at 110–129.
                  42
                     Doucouliagos & Laroche, Unions and Proﬁts: A Meta Regression Analysis, 48 Ind. Rel (2009).




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                     Balancing Flexibility and Rigidity                                                                     187

                     even when the 
---
ocus is on ﬁrm per
---
ormance, unions can have a positive impact. The case
                     
---
or unions is arguably strongest when there is clear lopsided bargaining power in 
---
avor o
---

                     employers. Unions can restore equilibrium and lead to a more e
---
ﬁcient outcome. In
                     more competitive markets, there is more o
---
 a debate on how beneﬁcial unions can be,
                     and there are large adverse consequences to consider.


                     C The On-Demand-Economy Is a Competitive Labor
                     Market, Not a Monopsony
                     The conditions that can lead to monopsonistic power do not exist in the twenty-ﬁrst
                     century on-demand economy. As discussed above, the classic monopsony occurs where a
                     small rural town has only one employer or where a 
---
ew employers collude to depress
                     wages. This is virtually impossible in an economy that runs on the global Internet. Indeed,
                     the on-demand economy exists on top o
---
 the existing traditional economy. More aptly
                     named, the “gig economy” does not replace traditional work, but provides a competitive
                     alternative to the nine-to-ﬁve.
                        One o
---
 the interesting 
---
eatures o
---
 the gig economy is that it is not just one industry.
                     Companies 
---
rom a variety o
---
 industries including transportation, housing, 
---
ood and
                     dining and retail are all in the gig economy. On-demand plat
---
orms like Uber, Ly
---
t,
                     Airbnb, TaskRabbit, Handy, etc. generally do not require extensive on-boarding or
                     particular pre-requisite skills, so workers can easily enter and exit these plat
---
orms – and
                     they do.
                        Gig workers typically do not work 
---
or just one on-demand plat
---
orm. Perhaps because
                     labor entry and exit barriers are so low, many companies in this space within the same
                     industries and across industries compete 
---
or similar workers. In the ride-sharing space,
                     drivers are typically simultaneously working with Uber, Ly
---
t, Juno, and Via. For example,
                     in a brie
---
 ﬁled on behal
---
 o
---
 Ly
---
t, a random survey o
---
 10,000 Cali
---
ornia Ly
---
t drivers 
---
ound
                     that over hal
---
 the drivers have driven with another ridesharing company.43 Moreover,
                     83 percent o
---
 drivers reported driving with Ly
---
t and another ridesharing company in the
                     same week, and o
---
 those driving with another ridesharing company in the same week,
                     75 percent reported they drove with another ride sharing company besides Ly
---
t in the
                     same hour.44 An online survey o
---
 1,200 ridesharing drivers, which was not produced on
                     behal
---
 o
---
 any ride sharing company, 
---
ound that nearly 80 percent o
---
 Uber drivers have
                     signed up 
---
or two or more services with companies such as Ly
---
t, Postmates, DoorDash,
                     UberEats, and Amazon Flex.45
                        This sort o
---
 “multi-homing” (where a user 
---
requently connects to more than one
                     network)46 is the norm in the gig economy. Workers can sign on up on Handy or on
                     competing on-demand plat
---
orms like Amazon Home Services, TaskRabbit, and Fiverr as
                     well as with traditional, local management companies that sta
---

---
 cleaners (i.e. those not in

                     43
                        Declaration o
---
 Simona A. Agnolucci in Support o
---
 Ly
---
t Inc.’s Brie
---
 Regarding Preliminary Approval o
---

                        Class Action Settlement (Case No. 3:13-cv-04065-VC) at 2.
                     44
                        Id. (emphasis added).
                     45
                        See “The Ride Sharing Guy,” https://therideshareguy.com/2018-uber-and-ly
---
t-driver-survey-results-the-ride
                        share-guy/.
                     46
                        See Jean J. Gabszewicz & Xavier Y. Wauthy, Two-Sided Markets and Price Competition with Multi-
                        Homing, (CORE discussion Paper 2004/30, May 4, 2004), http://webdoc.sub.gwdg.de/ebook/serien/e/
                        CORE/dp2004_30.pd
---
.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  188                                                                      The “Fissured” Workplace

                  on-demand space). Multi-homing indicates competition between on-demand plat
---
orms
                  and between on-demand plat
---
orms and traditional bricks-and-mortar employers.
                     On-demand companies not only contend with multi-homing; they also compete with
                  each other 
---
or labor, and with the traditional (non on-demand) companies, too. Handy is
                  competing with the local companies 
---
or the same housekeepers and handymen (and 
---
or
                  customers); in some markets Uber is competing with taxicabs 
---
or the same drivers;
                  Cleanly is competing with local wash-and-
---
old service providers; Soothe and Urban
                  Massage are competing with each other and the local salons and massage spas 
---
or
                  massage therapists. Competition is 
---
ostered where gig workers might switch to other
                  on-demand plat
---
orms or to traditional non-gig 
---
ull-time employment.
                     A recent report 
---
ound that as the traditional labor market has strengthened, this has
                  narrowed the pool o
---
 likely gig economy participants – indicating there is competition 
---
or
                  workers between traditional and gig economy workers.47 The gig economy is thus anti-
                  monopsonistic with regards to the traditional economy.
                     In 
---
act, by virtue o
---
 not having a physical location where workers have to “clock-in” to
                  work, the on-demand economy can ease the instances where large companies in small
                  towns exercise monopsony power. This is because on-demand economy opportunities
                  present an alternative option 
---
or workers without workers having to physically move. For
                  example, in a monopsonistic “company town,” where workers are tied to a particular
                  location because moving costs are high or because o
---
 
---
amily and community reasons, on-
                  demand companies present alternative work arrangements 
---
or them without workers
                  having to physically move. This will exert pressure on employers in the “company town”
                  to increase wages because they now must compete with on-demand companies. That is,
                  the presence o
---
 on-demand economy opportunities in a particular city 
---
unction as i
---
 a
                  new company has opened up. On-demand plat
---
orms introduce competition in otherwise
                  monopsonistic labor markets. In this way, the sharing economy lessens the beneﬁts o
---

                  unions in such markets.
                     Monopsonistic power can arise when workers have a specialized skillset, but this
                  condition does not describe the sharing economy in general. Gig jobs usually pertain
                  to driving (Uber, Ly
---
t, Juno, etc.), cleaning or other tasks (Handy, TaskRabbit, Cleanly),
                  dog walking (Wagz), valet services (Luxe), and delivery (Postmates, GrubHub, Cleanly,
                  InstaCart, etc.). These are typically considered low-skilled labor, and the consensus in the
                  economics literature is that labor markets in the United States, especially those 
---
or low- to
                  medium-skilled workers, are quite competitive.48 There are some companies, such as
                  Catalant, that create an on-demand 
---
eature 
---
or services o
---
 specialized consultants, but
                  they also operate in a competitive labor market 
---
or consultant services, with companies
                  such as McKinsey, Bain, Boston Consulting Group, and Deloitte as the largest ﬁrms in
                  this space. Since gigs generally do not require specialized labor, and unspecialized labor
                  generally operates in a competitive market, the gig economy is less likely to be mono-
                  psonistic or oligopsonistic.


                  47
                     Diana Farrell & Fiona Greig, The Online Plat
---
orm Economy: Has Growth Peaked?, JP Morgan Inst. 2, 3
                     (Nov. 2016), www.jpmorganchase.com/corporate/institute/document/jpmc-institute-online-plat
---
orm-econ-
                     brie
---
.pd
---
.
                  48
                     Peter Kuhn, Is Monopsony the Right Way to Model Labor Markets? A Review o
---
 Alan Manning’s
                     Monopsony in Motion, 11 Int’l J. Econ. Bus. 369 (2004); Tyler Cowen, Tanner Lecture Comment on
                     Elizabeth Anderson, Feb. 17, 2015.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                     Balancing Flexibility and Rigidity                                                                        189

                        In discussion o
---
 monopsonies, there are have been e
---

---
orts to use job search costs as a
                     source o
---
 monopsony power. The argument is that even i
---
 the geographic or specialized
                     skill set conditions are not present, monopsonistic power can arise when it is di
---
ﬁcult 
---
or
                     employees to know about and ﬁnd other jobs.49 In a similar vein, ﬁnite turnover and
                     hiring rate, or other aspects o
---
 high costs o
---
 changing a job, are all sources o
---
 potential
                     monopsonistic power. However, none o
---
 these are present in the sharing economy.
                     High turnover rate and high hiring rates are what deﬁne many o
---
 these industries.
                     A J.P. Morgan Chase study 
---
ound signiﬁcantly high churn 
---
or gig economy workers:
                     one in six workers in every given month is new, and three in six gig economy workers exit
                     within one year.50 Contrast this with the Bureau o
---
 Labor Statistics showing that
                     traditional employees’ median length o
---
 time with a current employer is over 
---
our years.51
                     At Uber alone, Jonathan Hall and Alan Krueger report that there are thousands upon
                     thousands o
---
 new active drivers added each month: in November 2014, there were
                     32,000 new active drivers added; in December 2014, there were almost 40,000 new
                     active drivers added.52 In total, 
---
rom a base o
---
 near zero in 2012, there were more than
                     160,000 active drivers by 2015 in the United States.53 While there were no global
                     numbers in this report, the 
---
ormer CEO o
---
 Uber has discussed how Uber adds “hundreds
                     o
---
 thousands” o
---
 drives globally each month.54 Hall and Krueger also report that about
                     45 percent o
---
 Uber drivers exit a
---
ter one year o
---
 starting.55
                        Lastly, another conception o
---
 monopsonistic labor market conditions comes 
---
rom Alan
                     Manning (2003), who argues that the existence o
---
 job search costs in ﬁnding employ-
                     ment implies that there is a monopsony even when employers are small relative to the
                     labor market. Several scholars have pointed out problems in Manning’s model and the
                     assumptions upon which it rests.56 However, even this condition would not apply to
                     the twenty-ﬁrst century economy, and certainly not to working in the sharing economy
                     given the countless examples o
---
 the competition and e
---

---
orts spent among on-demand
                     companies to recruit workers.57 As one example, Uber spent $86.6 million on “driver

                     49
                        Alan Manning, Monopsony In Motion: Imper
---
ect Competition In Labor Markets (2003).
                     50
                        Farrell & Greig, supra note 36.
                     51
                        U.S. Bureau o
---
 Labor Statistics, USDL-16-1867, Employee Tenure In 2016 (2016) www.bls.gov/news
                        .release/pd
---
/tenure.pd
---
.
                     52
                        Jonathan V. Hall & Alan B. Krueger An Analysis o
---
 the Labor Market 
---
or Uber’s Driver-Partners in the
                        United States, 71 I.R.L. Rev. 705, 707 (2017).
                     53
                        Id.
                     54
                        Ellen Huet, Uber is Adding Hundreds o
---
 Thousands o
---
 New Drivers Every Month, Forbes (Jun. 3, 2015
                        11:05 PM), www.
---
orbes.com/sites/ellenhuet/2015/06/03/uber-adding-hundreds-o
---
-thousands-o
---
-new-drivers-
                        every-month/#58375b79655e.
                     55
                        Hall & Krueger, supra note 41, at 708.
                     56
                        Kuhn supra note 37, at 376, points to a number o
---
 deﬁciencies in Manning’s model and illustrates how the
                        entire monopsony claim regarding job search costs is predicated on unrealistic assumptions about
                        diminishing returns to scale in recruiting workers. Kuhn also argues that, even i
---
 these assumptions about
                        a monopsony might hold in the very short run, the e
---

---
ect disappears in the medium to long run. He
                        explains that the empirical evidence suggests it is quite unreasonable to claim that any individual ﬁrm in a
                        labor market as large as those o
---
 the United States and United Kingdom will have monopsonistic
                        characteristics in the long run. Kuhn (at 376) concludes that the presence o
---
 a monopsony in U.S. and
                        U.K. labor markets is highly unlikely “unless one 
---
ocuses on workers with very speciﬁc skill types in very
                        deﬁned geographical areas.”
                     57
                        For example, see case study o
---
 how Uber employed controversial tactics to “steal” Ly
---
t drivers: Casey
                        Lewton, This Is Uber’s Playbook 
---
or Sabotaging Ly
---
t, The Verge, (accessed Aug. 26, 2014),
                        www.theverge.com/2014/8/26/6067663/this-is-ubers-playbook-
---
or-sabotaging-ly
---
t.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  190                                                                          The “Fissured” Workplace

                  incentives” in 2014, and $130.1 million driver incentives in the ﬁrst hal
---
 o
---
 2015. Uber
                  also o
---

---
ers extensive sign-up bonuses, and re
---
erral bonuses – as one extreme example, in
                  Singapore, Uber o
---

---
ered $2,50058 
---
or a single re
---
erral.59
                     Furthermore, Manning’s book was published as Internet job search tools and recruit-
                  ment were taking o
---

---
. In the years since, search costs and 
---
rictions have been reduced,
                  and no credible claims have been made that the trend will be reversed.
                     There
---
ore, the conditions that give rise to monopsony power are virtually nonexistent
                  in the on-demand space. The discussion here does not indicate that workers on the on-
                  demand plat
---
orm 
---
ace no problems. They do 
---
ace problems, but these are a 
---
undamen-
                  tally di
---

---
erent set o
---
 problems and conditions than what labor unions are set out to solve.
                  Indeed, the gig economy solves some traditional problems in the economy. By introdu-
                  cing competition, on-demand plat
---
orms obviate the need 
---
or unions. There
---
ore, unions
                  may not only be unnecessary, but actually harm
---
ul, in gig economy.


                  D The On-Demand Economy Requires Flexibility
                  Unions may provide many beneﬁcial work arrangements, though they can come at the
                  cost o
---
 rigidi
---
ying labor markets. But this rigidity is antithetical to the ﬂexible on-demand
                  gig economy. Gig jobs are by nature ﬂexible, and they provide a competitive alternative
                  to nine-to-ﬁve work that also imposes competitive pressure on otherwise monopsonistic
                  labor markets. In other words, by its very deﬁnition, the on-demand economy requires
                  ﬂexibility.
                     The need 
---
or ﬂexible labor supply in the on-demand economy is best illustrated by its
                  price system. The most unique 
---
eature o
---
 on-demand business models is that the
                  companies generally utilize an algorithm that matches supply and demand. To do this,
                  companies require a ﬂexible labor supply because when demand is high, they need
                  quantity supplied to instantaneously increase to meet the greater demand. In markets and
                  in the algorithm o
---
 the business models, this is done through the price system. When
                  demand is high, the algorithm generates a higher price per unit to incentivize an increase
                  in the quantity supplied o
---
 the good. This strategy is called “dynamic pricing.”60
                     Take Uber 
---
or example. Within the algorithm, there is a built-in incentive structure
                  that increases the cost to riders and the pay to drivers (i.e. surge pricing) to encourage
                  drivers to provide rides when that service is needed most, and this instantaneous supply-
                  demand matching requires a ﬂexible labor model (along with a nonstandard wage and
                  compensation structure). That is the core o
---
 Uber’s business model, and it is 
---
unctionally
                  di
---

---
erent to traditional businesses, such as taxicabs, even i
---
 taxicabs use an app (as they do
                  in NYC).
                     In 
---
act, this di
---

---
erence is precisely why economists Judd Cramer and Alan Krueger
                  
---
ound that the capacity utilization rate – measured by “the 
---
raction o
---
 time a driver has a
                  
---
are-paying passenger in the car while he or she is working, and by the share o
---
 total miles

                  58
                     Driver Re
---
erral Program in Singapore, Uber, www.uber.com/en-SG/drive/resources/re
---
errals/ (accessed
                     Jun. 13, 2018).
                  59
                     This is not to say that workers have always beneﬁted 
---
rom the decisions to sign-up with companies such as
                     Uber and Ly
---
t, rather that the presence o
---
 these programs indicates there is competition and e
---

---
ort directed
                     to recruit workers.
                  60
                     Jonathan Hall & Chris Nosko, Dynamic Labor Supply in the Sharing Economy, (U. Chicago Working
                     Paper, 2016), www.sole-jole.org/16433.pd
---
.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                     Balancing Flexibility and Rigidity                                                                   191

                     that drivers log in which a passenger is in their car”61 – is signiﬁcantly higher 
---
or UberX
                     drivers than 
---
or taxi drivers.62 That is, “UberX drivers spend a signiﬁcantly higher 
---
raction
                     o
---
 their time, and drive a substantially higher share o
---
 miles, with a passenger in their car
                     than do taxi drivers.”63 The paper concludes that part o
---
 the reason Uber drivers are able
                     to do so is because Uber’s ﬂexible labor model and surge pricing more closely match
                     supply with demand throughout the day.64 Thus, even “cabs with an app” are still
                     
---
unctionally di
---

---
erent than Uber (or Ly
---
t) because cabs and other traditional 
---
or-vehicles
                     have workers drive around during a given period o
---
 time in a given location, waiting 
---
or
                     an app or dispatcher to connect them.
                        Furthermore, in another paper studying how drivers respond to surge pricing,
                     M. Keith Chen and Michael Sheldon conclude that: “Uber partners both drive at times
                     with higher demand 
---
or rides, and dynamically extend their sessions when surge pricing
                     raises earnings.”65 Uber drivers are able to respond to the surge pricing because their
                     smartphone inter
---
ace “allows them to know current prices and session statistics like
                     cumulative earnings, time, and trips.”66 Competitor companies such as Ly
---
t and Juno
                     also include this 
---
eature. Companies outside o
---
 ride-sharing, such as Handy, also have a
                     “peak pricing” algorithm that incentivizes more Handy cleaners to supply their services at
                     popular times.67 Economists Jonathan Hall and Chris Nosko provide another investi-
                     gation o
---
 the impact o
---
 Uber’s dynamic pricing strategy. They ﬁnd that when demand
                     increases, dynamic pricing allows 
---
or quantity-supplied to meet the demand, and when
                     they model a hypothetical case with no surge pricing, this matching e
---

---
ect no longer
                     holds. Hall and Nosko then quanti
---
y the resulting ine
---
ﬁciencies in a world with no surge
                     pricing.68


                     E Union Rigidity Is at Odds with On-Demand Flexibility
                     Because the on-demand economy requires a ﬂexible labor supply to match supply and
                     demand, union rules about when and where work may occur are at odds in this space
                     since they impose greater rigidity on labor. Moreover, a key reason workers participate in
                     the on-demand economy is to set their own schedules, evidencing that rigidity is opposed
                     to their interests.


                     1 On-Demand Is Not Nine-to-Five
                     Consider the paid vacation time that most CBAs require. On-demand companies do not
                     require workers to work at any time. On-demand workers are generally 
---
ree to take

                     61
                        Judd Cramer & Alan B. Krueger, Disruptive Change in the Taxi Business: The Case o
---
 Uber, 106
                        Am. Econ. Rev. 177, 177 (2016).
                     62
                        Id. at 179.
                     63
                        Id. at 177.
                     64
                        Id.
                     65
                        M. Keith Chen & Michael Sheldon, Dynamic Pricing in a Labor Market: Surge Pricing and Flexible Work
                        on the Uber Plat
---
orm 13, (UCLA Anderson Working Paper, 2015), www.anderson.ucla.edu/
---
aculty/keith
                        .chen/papers/SurgeAndFlexibleWork_WorkingPaper.pd
---
.
                     66
                        Id. at 15.
                     67
                        What Is Peak Pricing?, Handy, https://help.handy.com/hc/en-us/articles/219851127-What-is-Peak-Pricing-,
                        (last visited Jun. 13, 2018).
                     68
                        Hall & Nosko, supra note 48.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  192                                                                       The “Fissured” Workplace

                  50 days o
---
 vacation, to never work a holiday, to never work overtime, or to work every
                  Sunday. How would a rule 
---
or time-and-a-hal
---
 on Sundays distort Uber’s surge pricing
                  model? I
---
 a CBA were to require that on-demand companies 
---
orbid workers 
---
rom working
                  on vacation days, then this would deteriorate the on-demand 
---
eature o
---
 on-demand
                  companies. The main 
---
eature o
---
 the industry is that consumers can get a ride, cleaning
                  services, 
---
ood, laundry services, or dog walking at any time they need it; they get it “on
                  demand.” A union rule 
---
orbidding workers to voluntarily work on holidays would harm
                  the essence o
---
 the on-demand services. And more generally, this type o
---
 rule is not
                  applicable to cases where these on-demand companies do not set requirements 
---
or their
                  workers on how many hours or how many days a week they need to supply their services.
                  This rule is a better ﬁt in a context where employees were 
---
orced to work holidays, 
---
or
                  long hours, and with little vacation time o
---

---
.
                     O
---
 course, it is possible that gig economy “unions” could have an entirely di
---

---
erent
                  
---
ocus 
---
rom traditional unions. For example, the Independent Driver’s Guild, a quasi-
                  union 
---
or Uber drivers, has organized campaigns to permit tipping and the ability to opt
                  out o
---
 Uber Pool (a service that allows shared rides with other passengers). But while
                  these ambitions are unequally tied to Uber’s business model, they essentially amount to
                  the traditional priority o
---
 seeking higher pay. Other IDG e
---

---
orts more clearly reﬂect
                  agenda items similar to traditional union priorities, such as trying to get health care
                  coverage 
---
or all drivers. Moreover, traditional unions such the New York Taxi Workers
                  Alliance and the Amalgamated Transit Union are vying 
---
or the opportunity to represent
                  Uber drivers alongside their representation o
---
 workers in the traditional economy.69
                  There
---
ore, it seems that gig-economy unions can be analyzed as i
---
 they would seek
                  collective bargaining agreements similar to those sought by unions in traditional
                  economies.
                     The 8-hour workday and 40-hour workweek do not make much sense because on-
                  demand workers have the 
---
reedom to work any hours they like, whenever they want to
                  work them. They can take time o
---

---
 
---
or long periods o
---
 time. In 
---
act, most drivers
                  working 
---
or Uber (85 percent) work less than thirty-ﬁve hours a week 
---
or Uber.70 And
                  according to a Benenson Strategy Group survey 
---
or Uber drivers, 69 percent o
---
 drivers
                  have other 
---
ull-time or part-time work and hal
---
 o
---
 Uber drivers use the plat
---
orm 
---
or less
                  than ten hours a week.71 Data 
---
rom the recent Ly
---
t Cali
---
ornia lawsuit also indicate that
                  less than 1 percent o
---
 Cali
---
ornia Ly
---
t drivers (755 out o
---
 150,000) worked thirty or more
                  hours in at least hal
---
 o
---
 the weeks they drove with Ly
---
t.72 And, over 100,000 people
                  (more than two-thirds o
---
 the class members) “have driven less than sixty hours in total
                  
---
or Ly
---
t.”73




                  69
                     Will Bredderman, The Other Uber Fight: Unions Brawl to Rep Drivers, Crain’s New York Business
                     (Jun. 14, 2018).
                  70
                     Jonathan v. Hall & Alan B. Krueger, An Analysis o
---
 the Labor Market 
---
or Uber’s Driver-Partners in the
                     United States 18 (Princeton U. Working Paper No. 22843, 2015).
                  71
                     Uber: The Driver Roadmap 2.0, Benensen Strategy Group, www.bsgco.com/insights/uber-the-driver-road
                     map, (last visited Jun. 14, 2018).
                  72
                     Cotter v. Ly
---
t Inc., 176 F. Supp. 3d 930, 939 (N. D. Cal. 2016) (Order Den. Mot. 
---
or Prelim. Approval o
---

                     Class Action Settlement).
                  73
                     Id.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                     Balancing Flexibility and Rigidity                                                                         193


                     2 On-Demand Workers Pre
---
er Flexibility
                     Moreover, one o
---
 the main reasons workers join the on-demand plat
---
orm is precisely
                     because they desire the ﬂexibility o
---
 the li
---
estyle.74 They may desire to escape the rigidity
                     o
---
 traditional labor arrangements. For example, survey data o
---
 Uber drivers shows that
                     73 percent o
---
 the drivers said they would rather have a job where they choose their own
                     schedule and where they are their own boss, rather than the traditional model o
---
 a steady
                     nine-to-ﬁve job with some beneﬁts and a set salary.75 Furthermore, 63 percent o
---
 Uber
                     drivers said they speciﬁcally use Uber to have more ﬂexibility so they can balance work
                     and 
---
amily.76 Drivers 
---
or Ly
---
t look similar. A survey o
---
 3,100 Ly
---
t drivers 
---
ound that
                     82 percent o
---
 Ly
---
t drivers agreed or strongly agreed with the statement “I like being an
                     independent contractor” and 99 percent o
---
 Ly
---
t drivers agreed with the statement “I like
                     to choose when I work.”
                        Furthermore, women particularly beneﬁt 
---
rom the ﬂexibility o
---
 the on-demand econ-
                     omy.77 This type o
---
 li
---
estyle is especially important 
---
or women, who o
---
ten have 
---
amily
                     care responsibilities, which they need to balance within the conﬁnes o
---
 a traditional nine-
                     to-ﬁve workday. In a survey o
---
 2,000 US-based 
---
emale gig workers, the study 
---
ound that
                     32 percent o
---
 women indicated that they le
---
t their 
---
ull-time jobs 
---
or the gig economy
                     because they wanted more ﬂexibility, and another 28 percent indicated that they needed
                     more time to care 
---
or a child, parent, or relative.78 When women were asked to compare
                     the top beneﬁts o
---
 being a gig worker, 96 percent placed “ﬂexibility” as the primary
                     beneﬁt.79 The qualitative answers in the report also indicate the 
---
reedom women see in
                     this type o
---
 work and importance in having opportunities to earn income outside o
---

                     traditional workplace.


                     3 On-Demand Strikes
                     One o
---
 the main “sticks” unions carry is the ability to strike and put pressure on
                     employers to agree to certain terms or to change working conditions and pay. Strikes
                     impose large costs on employers as they halt production. The strike pressures employers
                     to acquiesce to union demands. But strikes may be less e
---

---
ective on the Internet than in
                     person. First, striking in the on-demand space is o
---

---
set by the pricing algorithm: when
                     many workers leave the plat
---
orm, prices and wages increase, attracting more workers until
                     an equilibrium is reached. Second, strikes are more e
---

---
ective in person, where striking

                     74
                        Elka Torpey & Andrew Hogan, Working in a Gig Economy, Career Outlook, U.S. Bureau o
---
 Labor
                        Statistics, www.bls.gov/careeroutlook/2016/article/what-is-the-gig-economy.htm.
                     75
                        See supra note 57 (“I
---
 both were available to you, at this point in your li
---
e, would you rather have a steady
                        9-to-5 job with some beneﬁts and a set salary or a job where you choose your own schedule and be your
                        own boss?”).
                     76
                        Id.
                     77
                        Natasha Singer, In the Sharing Economy, Workers Find Both Freedom and Uncertainty, N.Y. Times
                        (Aug. 16, 2014) www.nytimes.com/2014/08/17/technology/in-the-sharing-economy-workers-ﬁnd-both-
---
ree
                        dom-and-uncertainty.html; Paul Merrion & Fareeha Ali, Making Inroads: Women Cabbies on the Rise,
                        Crain’s Chicago Business, (Sept. 27, 2014), www.chicagobusiness.com/article/20140927/ISSUE01/
                        309279976/making-inroads-women-cabbies-on-the-rise.
                     78
                        Hyperwallet, The Future o
---
 Gig Work is Female, Hyperwallet Ecommerce Marketplaces, 1, 9, (May 3,
                        2017), www.hyperwallet.com/app/uploads/HW_The_Future_o
---
_Gig_Work_is_Female.pd
---
.
                     79
                        Id at 15.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                  194                                                                      The “Fissured” Workplace

                  and picketing is visible. But the on-demand economy 
---
unctions via apps and web sites,
                  not at physical locations. There
---
ore, unions’ most power
---
ul stick, striking, can be
                  masticated by decentralized work, a hallmark o
---
 the gig economy.
                     Again returning to Uber as an example, i
---
 some workers went on strike, that would
                  incentivize other workers to supply more hours driving. When there is a decrease in the
                  supply o
---
 workers (
---
rom those striking), this would increase the price per ride (i.e. surge
                  pricing), and thus encourage other drivers to go out and work. Theoretically, i
---
 surge-
                  pricing is prolonged, this would incentivize new drivers to enter the plat
---
orm.
                     Furthermore, as Judge Richard Posner points out, one o
---
 the unique 
---
eatures about
                  strikes is that the 
---
orm o
---
 picketing deters other employees 
---
rom working during strikes.80
                  In a picket strike, employees protest outside o
---
 a physical location. Everyone can see who
                  is striking and who is not. This pressures other colleagues to strike as well because, once
                  the striking workers return, they will be working side to side with these same people who
                  may have decided not to strike. This social mechanism endogenous to picketing allows
                  
---
or more success
---
ul strikes. History conﬁrms that picketing outside a physical location can
                  encourage con
---
ormity among worker-strikers.
                     However, picketing is absent in the on-demand economy because there is no physical
                  location workers must be, which weakens this traditional sanctioning mechanism. In
                  other words, whether workers are striking or not is not “public” in
---
ormation, since the
                  striking picketers do not see other non-striking colleagues 
---
ace-to-
---
ace when they’re
                  entering the building to work, as would be the case with a traditional job.81 This
                  anonymity reduces the pressure 
---
or workers in the on-demand space to strike, and they
                  can continue going to work while a “strike” is happening. There
---
ore, the strike is
                  weakened as an e
---

---
ective tool 
---
or change since the ﬁrms retains a greater portion o
---
 their
                  contractors still working 
---
or them.
                     Thus, taken together, traditional union agreements not only would harm the on-
                  demand economy, but also weaken the en
---
orceability and strength o
---
 these rules in on-
                  demand economy space.


                  F Conclusion
                  Unions are a power
---
ul 
---
orce 
---
or workers’ rights where an overly power
---
ul employer could
                  otherwise 
---
orce workers to work around the clock, 
---
or too little pay, or in unsa
---
e
                  conditions. Unions can also empower workers to exercise their opinions vis-à-vis man-
                  agement. At the same time, power
---
ul unions that restrict competition and use o
---
 non-
                  union labor can cause labor markets to become more rigid and harm labor mobility and
                  ﬂexibility. Since unions can be help
---
ul or harm
---
ul, depending on various market condi-
                  tions, it is important to consider the market conditions o
---
 the gig economy when thinking
                  about rights 
---
or such workers to unionize.
                     The nature o
---
 work in the gig economy is 
---
undamentally di
---

---
erent 
---
rom work in the
                  traditional economy, and many o
---
 the problems that traditional unions sought to solve do
                  not exist in the same nature as in the gig economy. For example, 
---
or most o
---
 the gig
                  economy jobs, work is at-will and on-demand, and concerns about guaranteed eight-hour
                  days or mandatory overtime hours are inapposite. Elaborate protocols 
---
or hiring and

                  80
                       Richard Posner, Some Economics o
---
 Labor Law, 51 U. Chi. L. Rev. 988, 1005–1006 (1984).
                  81
                       Though one area where there could be picketing is by airport waiting areas.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                     Balancing Flexibility and Rigidity                                                                         195

                     ﬁring that may protect skilled workers may instead inter
---
ere with the low barriers o
---
 entry
                     and exit 
---
or gig economy work, where it is valuable to easily “sign-up” or “deactivate”
                     
---
rom the various di
---

---
erent plat
---
orms and work with many di
---

---
erent plat
---
orms at the same
                     time.82 Concerns about wage rates are less in gig economy jobs where workers set their
                     own “wages” and rates to charge 
---
or the various services they provide (i.e. TaskRabbit,
                     Thumbtack); indeed, a union requiring all “Taskers” to receive the same pay 
---
or a given
                     service would reduce the incentives to gain elite status on those plat
---
orms. Furthermore,
                     gig economy workers are more heterogenous than traditional workers in that while some
                     o
---
 them might be working 
---
ull-time 
---
or one plat
---
orm, others are multi-homing on various
                     plat
---
orms or using a plat
---
orm 
---
or supplemental income, so homogenous and mandatory
                     beneﬁts (which come at the expense o
---
 higher pay) 
---
or all gig workers would make it hard
                     
---
or non-traditional workers to beneﬁt 
---
rom the gig economy. There
---
ore, the traditional
                     solution o
---
 unionization and the traditional aspects o
---
 CBAs may not be applicable as the
                     way 
---
orward 
---
or this new economy.
                        This does not mean that gig economy workers 
---
ace per
---
ect conditions. For example,
                     some gig economy workers do not have an e
---

---
ective channel or avenue to express
                     dissatis
---
action, or 
---
ace problems o
---
 “instant deactivation” techniques,83 or lack adequate
                     knowledge and up
---
ront in
---
ormation about the cost-side o
---
 their gig work (i.e. some Uber
                     drivers have expressed that they did not 
---
ully understand the cost/expense o
---
 driving and
                     car amortization). O
---
 course, gig economy workers also do not receive health and
                     retirement beneﬁts as most traditional employees do.
                        These sets o
---
 problems require a set o
---
 solutions that should likely come outside o
---

                     traditional unionization techniques84 and traditional CBA agreements because the gig
                     economy is predicated on having a ﬂexible labor supply that adjusts to real-time demand.
                     Such adjustment is not possible where union collective bargaining agreements restrict
                     wage changes, hiring and ﬁring, maximum and minimum hours worked, layo
---

---
s, promo-
                     tions, etc. It is certainly possible that CBAs 
---
or gig economy workers will look 
---
undamen-
                     tally di
---

---
erent than traditional CBAs. However, to the extent that unionization and CBAs
                     in the gig economy operate on a similar 
---
ramework o
---
 creating rigid rules that o
---
ten
                     involve restricting prices or hours-worked and restricting labor mobility via hiring and
                     ﬁring conditions, then it will likely threaten the existence o
---
 the gig economy, which
                     needs ﬂexibility o
---
 labor supply. This can harm the value o
---
 the on-demand economy and
                     reduce the opportunities 
---
or people to earn a living or engage in a “side-hustle” on these
                     plat
---
orms. Solutions in this new economy should look beyond traditional unionization
                     techniques and should be open to more innovative approaches that can minimize harm
                     while still addressing the needs o
---
 gig economy workers.




                     82
                        However, there was a problem that in the early days o
---
 Uber, drivers signed up 
---
or Uber under potentially
                        
---
alse advertising claims, and bought new cars speciﬁcally 
---
or a job with Uber. These investments and high-
                        ﬁxed costs did create a barrier to exit 
---
or Uber drivers.
                     83
                        In some cases, this is warranted, as sexual harassment claims instantly ‘deactivate’ a driver to prevent this
                        particular driver to be matched with another rider.
                     84
                        For example, there is discussion o
---
 re
---
orming labor law to move toward portable beneﬁts solutions that are
                        not tied to employment. And, interestingly, portable-beneﬁts are already beginning to arise in the market-
                        place place 
---
or retirement beneﬁts. Companies such as Honest Dollar and Nestana are providing
                        competitive individualized 401K beneﬁts plans to contractors and 
---
reelancers.




https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108610070.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press
